The Joe Rogan experience.
So, so when you base your,
your core beliefs on things that are not reality based, mm-hmm,
<affirmative> on things that are, are based on wishful thinking.
So a lot of people get into astrology because they want to believe that,
you know,
there are F faiths out there that are gonna look after them or whatever. Yeah.
And if you indulge in wishful thinking that way,
the evidence now shows you actually compromise your mind's immune system.
So when you believe things, because you want to, you want them to be true,
your mental, your mind's immune system gets weaker.
And there's now actually now empirical research that indicates this. So,
so if you, for example, um, except that <affirmative>,
uh, that, that clinging to your, your,
your articles of faith, uh, no matter what is a virtue,
you're less likely to change your mind when evidence comes along. Right.
And when that happens, you become more susceptible to conspiracy thinking more,
more susceptible to, uh, uh, divisive, political ideologies,
more susceptible to, uh, science, denial, um,
your re your mind's resistance to bad ideas starts to decay.
You can actually damage your mind's immune system by indulging and wishful
think. Mm.
That makes sense. Do you, do you highlight specific Strat energies, uh,
in your book for looking at things accurately and looking at things objectively?
Yeah, I mean, so,
so science is clearly a shining example of what's possible,
uh,
in the way of idea testing and the way of validating things with evidence mm-hmm
<affirmative>. So, um, you know, S that are specially good at, uh,
testing things in laboratories or with experiments. Um,
now philosophers have always gone in for a, kind of a related,
but slightly different kind of idea.
Testing philosophers don't have laboratories except the ones between their ears.
And basically we test ideas against each other, and we test ideas, uh,
with questions and a lot of ti, and we test ideas against our,
our intuitions about right and wrong, and try to figure out what makes sense.
Um, that's a complimentary kind of idea testing that scientists go in for,
and it's one that has done a huge amount to
educate and, um,
enlighten us over the centuries. And so there, uh,
what I try to do in the book is, is take things from this cutting edge science,
I call cognitive immunology. It's the science of mental immunity.
You combine that with ancient wisdom about how to, how to pursue wisdom,
how to find wisdom,
and you actually get some really powerful ways to strengthen mental immune
systems.
In, like, what ways, what, what do you use personally? Do you need it,
or you've,
you've been sort of indoctrinated into the world of objective thinking to the
point where you don't need any systems that you follow.
Well, I try, I try not to think that I have all the answers and that I've, uh,
you know, got it all figured out. Um, look at humility.
We know this humility is really important for,
for a well-functioning mental immune system for everything.
Right. Well.
Yeah, yeah, sure. Let's go, let's go with that.
My research in specializes in, you know,
trying to understand how the minds, it develops resistance to bad ideas.
Um,
and once you think you have all the answers you stop learning and your thinking
starts to go haywire. Mm. So you gotta maintain that humility, or, you know,
you're just, you're compromising your own mind.
Humility specifically.
Humility's important, fair mindedness. Like, so, so if,
so a lot of people do this, they, they, um,
they ridicule or derive other people's ideas for failing to meet basic
standards, but then they don't apply those same standards to their own views.
Right? Like, do you have anything example of this? Um.
Sure. Um, well,
well, I think a whole lot of political, uh,
rhetoric has this character, right? Mm-hmm, <affirmative> slam the other side,
um, ridicule as,
as us sloppy thinking or as ideologically driven,
but never examined to see whether your own views. That's.
A perfect example of it. Right.
And politics is probably the very best example of how people do this.
They get super tribal. They only look at exactly the,
the other side is being bad and their side,
they find justifications for every questionable behavior or every weird
scandal, every, you know, everything that doesn't fit the narrative.
Yeah. And, and I'd say that politics is probably the best example,
but religion and ethics, um, and sometimes economics or others.
So wherever values come into play, people get very attached to their ideas.
Cause we all want to think that I, that we are, we are right,
and to true and virtuous, right?
So whatever ideas we've already internalized as beliefs,
they have to be the virtuous beliefs and any new incoming information that
challenges them from the other side of the political aisle or from another
religion or from those atheists over there, that's the enemy.
And in your mind's immune system attacks that information and you never
become, and you never gained the fair mindedness needed to learn.
Catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and
audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.